feat: add support for querying Trace by Id through multiple Tempo instances (#6193)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/operations/federation.md

---
title: Federated query frontend
menuTitle: Federation
description: Learn how to query traces across multiple Tempo instances using the federated query frontend.
weight: 650
---

# Federated query frontend

> {{< admonition type="warning" >}}

Reviewer: Thank you for adding the note for this feature. We have [two shortcodes](https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/shortcodes/#docsexperimental-deployment) that insert admonitions that use standard wording. I think some variation of this might be useful. 

Experimental deployment shortcode has this usage:  `{{< docs/experimental-deployment >}}`

and results in: 
>This deployment is provided only as an example; engineering and on-call support is not available. Documentation is either limited or not provided outside of code comments. No SLA is provided. This example is primarily intended for open source engineers. Because this is provided as an example, it is not meant to be used in production environments, and the risks are unknown/high.

and experimental shortcode:  `{{< docs/experimental product="experimental-feature" featureFlag="its-feature-flag" >}}`

which results in: 
> experimental-feature is an [experimental feature](https://grafana.com/docs/release-life-cycle/). Engineering and on-call support is not available. Documentation is either limited or not provided outside of code comments. No SLA is provided. Enable the its-feature-flag feature toggle in Grafana to use this feature. Do not enable this feature in production environments.

- **Multi-cluster setups**: Each Kubernetes cluster has its own Tempo instance
- **Organizational boundaries**: Different teams operate independent Tempo instances

Without federation, querying a trace ID requires knowing which instance contains it, or querying each instance manually.
Federation solves this by providing a unified query layer.

## Architecture

The federated query frontend acts as a proxy that fans out requests to multiple Tempo instances and combines the results.

When you query a trace ID, the federated frontend:

1. Sends the request to all configured Tempo instances in parallel
1. Collects responses from each instance
1. Combines the trace spans from all instances into a single response
1. Returns the merged trace to the client

## Configuration

Configure the federated query frontend using the `federated_frontend` configuration block.

You must set the `target` to `federated-query-frontend` as a command-line argument when starting Tempo.
This starts Tempo as a dedicated federated query frontend instead of the standard all-in-one or microservices mode.

```sh
tempo -target=federated-query-frontend -config.file=/etc/tempo.yaml
```

### Basic configuration

> The following example shows a minimal federation configuration:

Reviewer: I don't think you need this heading. You provide the configuration start instructions, the example, and then available options. Also, does someone add this configuration into their standard Tempo configuration file or is this a completely separate configuration file? Would they append this to an existing configuration file? 
```suggestion

The example `tempo.yaml` shows a minimal federation configuration:
```
